---
# Feel free to add content and custom Front Matter to this file.
# To modify the layout, see https://jekyllrb.com/docs/themes/#overriding-theme-defaults
layout: home
show_title: false
title: Home
---


# I am a developer. I make mistakes, but I learn from them. When I identify something that I do consistently, I document it here.

# **This is my playbook.**
{: .text-yellow-000 }

Use the nav to explore high-level topics. Within each of these topics there are
sub-topics. 

Each page has a commit history, which you can view using the 'Changelog' link at
the bottom of each page.

This playbook is open source! The source is available on
[Github]({{site.repo}}). The site is built using [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com/).
[Gatsby.js](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/) was also considered for this, but I
preferred Jekyll's ability to put content front-and-center, at the expense of a
built-in webpack plugin.

This site uses <a href="https://github.com/pmarsceill/just-the-docs">Just the
Docs</a>, a documentation theme for Jekyll.

The theme has been
[customised]({{site.repo}}/blob/master/_sass/custom/custom.scss), and some
components have [minor
overrides]({{site.repo}}/blob/master/_sass/_overrides.scss). The default layout
has also been [modified]({{site.repo}}/blob/master/_layouts/default.html) to
include the page title and content license, changelog, and issue links.

The site is hosted on [Github Pages](https://pages.github.com/) and served via
[Cloudflare](https://cloudflare.com/).

The [Roboto](https://github.com/google/roboto/) font is used for pricipal
typography. Stylesheets are compiled with [SASS](https://sass-lang.com/).

This guide is heavily inspired by [Thoughtbot's
Playbook](https://thoughtbot.com/playbook), but the content is my own.

Site content is licensed under [Creative Common's Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0
International License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).  This
license requires that reusers give credit to the author. It allows reusers to
distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format,
even for commercial purposes. If others remix, adapt, or build upon my content,
they must license the modified material under identical terms.

